Many researchers are strongly dissatisfied with academia today. The "modern" way of organizing research is very different from the previous century. However, #science itself remains as mesmerizing as before.

For students/postdocs who are still deciding on which #career to pursue, I am listing below some major pros and cons of an academic track.


Major pros (and dreams):

1. You can unleash your utmost creativity! You can explore whatever your gut feelings tell you. You are limited only by your imagination.

2. You are in charge of your own group. You can grow and advance it the way you prefer. An academic group is like a small startup that you are driving towards success.

3. You have an excellent opportunity to share your experience and mentor #PhD students and postdocs, helping them become outstanding thinkers and leaders.

4. You can work and collaborate internationally, without the restrictions that exist in the corporate and industrial world. 

5. You are a boss to yourself. You can define how you work and what you do each day.

6. You work at the forefront of the human progress, pushing forward the humanity’s knowledge.

7. You can teach courses and pass knowledge to younger minds. If you love teaching (like me), you will find it super-rewarding.

8. Finally, once you receive tenure, you’re on a permanent position. Not sure if it’s a big deal after all, but for many it is.


Major cons:

1. Low salary. Compared to similar #leadership positions in industry, academic salaries are low.

2. Getting your cool ideas funded is hard, especially at the beginning. 

3. Administrative hurdles can be very annoying and discouraging.

4. You may have very little time for anything (including family), so time management becomes crucial. 

5. You may have a lot of extra duties that eat time and are irrelevant to your research.

6. Despite all the talks about “collaborative environments”, academia is very competitive. The rivalries are fierce and the clashes are loud. Negative outcomes can quickly escalate into a feeling of hopelessness and despair.

7. An immediate “recognition” is exceedingly rare. To appreciate your work, the community will always need time. Despite tough competition for ideas and funding, academia is a slowly revolving world.


Finally, one of the coolest things about #academia is that you can make big discoveries with a relatively a small team. In some way, it’s like software development – you can make an app that may become very popular. The key is to come up a brilliant idea and realize it.


#mentorship #students #university #postdoc